---
title: Are Stratocasters not cool anymore?
tags:
- cool
- fender
- strat
- stratocaster
date: 2012-05-30 11:36:25.000000000 -07:00
layout: post
author: Jamie Henson
---

Recently I've been researching heavily into guitars, since I'm looking into buying another, to add to my Mexican Standard Stratocaster that I've played faithfully since 2007\. An observation I've made however is that, in the public circuit, the Stratocaster doesn't seem to be used very much at all anymore - which is strange given its extreme popularity in older times. Maybe I'm just out of tune with some live bands these days, or maybe I'm just wrong (since it's impossible to know the setup of every band, everywhere, right?), but the Strat seems to have been left aside in favour of the Fender stablemates Telecaster, Jaguar and Jazzmaster. And Gibsons too. Lots of them.

But they're damn good guitars. They wouldn't have lasted this long if they weren't any good right?

<!-- more -->

Back in the 50s when they were first made, they were a status symbol - a must have instrument. The sunburst finish of Buddy Holly's Strat on the cover of "The Chirping Crickets" symbolised a new injection of creativity amongst the sea of comparatively mundane guitars here in the UK. Before rock and roll, many guitarists played mainly classical guitar and the guitar wasn't exactly seen as an especially exciting instrument to play.

From that point on, many of who are considered the world's best guitarists used Stratocasters almost exclusively: Hendrix, Clapton, Gilmour, Knopfler, Stevie Ray Vaughan to name a few. The Strat was known for its distinct look and versatility. The customary setup of three single-coil pickups and a floating tremolo allowed for a range of sounds that other guitars could only dream of.

On the back of this success in the hands of guitar icons and weekend rockstars alike, the Stratocaster was widely copied over the years following. The quality varied at either side of the mark. Some guitars known as "superstrats" resemble the ergonomic contoured body of the Stratocaster, but feature highly specialist electronics for a proportionally higher price. However, the more popular side was the sub-Fender quality mark.

When I first started out on the instrument, I saw that everybody I knew who also played seemed to start out on a cheap Strat copy, obtained from Argos or gullably bought from a guitar shop in town on the premise that "they were just the same". I can imagine that this was the same situation around the country, if not a good portion of the world. The shape of the Stratocaster was everywhere, and the quality varied from a production line in China to a specialist workshop in California - without much in the way of aesthetic variation.

This highlights a couple of reasons why I suspect it's no longer used as frequently these days. If a band is breaking onto the scene, or generally trying to raise their profile publically through gigs, then they may not want to be 'seen' with a guitar that resembles what everybody seems to start with. Even if they use a Strat in the studio, which is possible due to their versatile and highly acclaimed sound, they are conscious of fans thinking that, live, they are using low budget equipment. This is quite a shallow and superficial thought, but generally it is understood that the quality of your instrument corresponds to how much of a financial, and thus, personal investment you have put into the music. Plus, some people see using one as being too "conformist", and strive to play more unusual models.

Also, there seems to be a feeling that the Strat is something your Dad would play. Yeah, shedloads of famous rock icons used them in the past, but they are getting on a bit, if they're not dead already. There aren't many *current* guitar players who are specifically known for playing a Stratocaster. In fact I can't really think of more than three. Alex Turner of the Arctic Monkeys originally had one in Arctic White, and that was partially the reason I bought one, because I was a massive fan of the band around that time. But since, he's changed to a Fender Bronco, and then a Les Paul. John Frusciante tends to use one a lot, as does John Mayer.

So maybe, their time will come back around again, when the guitars typified by today's foremost guitarists go out of favour. I certainly don't see them being discontinued any time soon!
