---
title: 'Interactive Devices: the final two ideas'
tags:
- devices
- ideas
- instrument
- interactive
- lab
- speaker
- tangible
- water
date: 2013-10-16 07:57:48.000000000 -07:00
layout: post
author: Jamie Henson
---

As stated during the previous post, yesterday we had a large brainstorming session to try and settle on an idea for our Interactive Devices project this term. By the end, we had two candidates - which are outlined below:

### Waves To Waves

Waves To Waves (name currently not finalised) is a water-driven musical instrument that creates ambient soundscapes from natural wave motion. WTW will directly generate sounds from the frequency and magnitude of waves in water, and will also allow manual interaction with the water to introduce new features into the soundscape.

<!-- more -->

The proposed hardware configuration is a large open-topped glass tank of water, with a camera mounted at one side to observe the physical movement of the water. Furthermore, vibration detectors are to be mounted inside the tank to monitor disturbances in the water.

The challenge will be how WTW reacts to multiple simultaneous wave sources, and ensuring that the texture of the output sound scales accordingly whilst still sounding coherent and audibly pleasing. As well as the core audio foundation, there is also the potential for a visual component to tie in with the audio generation, projected upwards through the bottom of the tank.

The successful combination of strong audio and visual sides generated directly from water-based interactions would make for a highly expressive and appealing musical performance for artists looking for a new way of exploring music via a physical medium.

### Tangible Speaker

The Tangible Speaker takes an established piece of hardware and attempts to reinvent it by applying Reality-Based Interaction (RBI) techniques to it. In essence, it is a speaker that you can directly interact with, rather than the traditional dial-based method of interaction. For example, to change the volume you would simply make the speaker bigger.

The proposed hardware configuration is a speaker enclosed in a custom-built, resizable case. Sensors will be positioned at various positions within the case to detect when manipulations occur - such as shaking the speaker or turning it. The data collected by these sensors can then be used to manipulate the sounds emitted by the speaker.

For this proposal, the challenge will lie in making the interactions with the speaker truly intuitive. There is clearly no inherent need to reinvent a speaker, but as has been seen in the past a more natural method of interaction can improve user’s experience with a device. Therefore, it is key that we take great consideration into what a user is likely to try when attempting interaction with the speaker, and to ensure that the result is as expected.

The obvious use case for this product would be in the home, as a replacement for a traditional speaker. However, there is definitely potential for the Tangible Speaker to be used for musical performance. A performer may want to adjust the effects on their music in a more expressive way than previously available to them. An example of this would be applying a vibrato effect to a tone - instead of perhaps using an effects pedal, the performer could shake the speaker to provide the same effect.

### How we worked as a group

Working in a group of three, we arrived at our final two ideas efficiently. From the start we were all in agreement that we wanted to build a device directly related to music and our final two ideas certainly reflect this.

Testimony to our harmonious way of thinking was the fact that each member of the group independently proposed very similar ideas in the initial task. We had two separate suggestions for a drum machine for people with physical difficulties, and each of the 3 members also suggested a system that generated music from dance. The fact that we were suggesting similar ideas meant that were able to easily agree which to keep and which to discard.

Despite having fewer initial ideas, what we lacked in quantity we made up in quick decisive decisions. After categorising our 30 or so ideas into 3 groups based on the type of interactions used, we subsequently narrowed down the initial pool of ideas efficiently by discussing the relative merits and pitfalls of each one. We were also quick to adapt previous ideas after initial criticism - for example, an idea proposed to print sheet music from a musical input evolved to produce a 3D representation of a musician’s performance after a suggestion from Jarrod.
