---
title: 'Hitman Absolution: Agent 47''s midlife crisis'
tags:
- absolution
- call of duty
- game
- hitman
- io interactive
- pc
- review
- shame
categories:
- Games
- Technology
date: 2013-01-05 17:19:39.000000000 -08:00
layout: post
author: Jamie Henson
---

I don't normally review games, but this one was an interesting case.

I've always followed the Hitman series religiously, simultaneously loving and hating it's open-level style of play. They aren't the most polished of games, but they brought something utterly unique to the table - and you have to respect them for that, in the days of shooters lobotomised to the point of retardation. Hitman: Blood Money refined the formula to near-perfection - well perfection in 2006 anyway. It is still regarded favourably today.

In that respect, Hitman: Absolution isn't a Hitman game. But it isn't a bad game.

<!-- more -->

It plays like a Hitman mod for an enhanced edition of Splinter Cell: Conviction. Like Conviction, "missions" are a linear progression of independent sequences, that mostly consist of you sneaking around and hiding. You can mark and execute multiple targets, use cover effectively, and are reliant on the objects in the scene. There are quick-time events triggered by pushing buttons. There is a deep yet slightly ludicrous storyline based around rescuing a young, vulnerable girl, set in a small number of locations. But Conviction rewards you for violence, Absolution condemns you for it.

Conviction wasn't a bad game, but it wasn't Splinter Cell anymore. It was a mish mash of everything else. It was instantly forgettable. The same will happen for Absolution for me, sadly.

The great thing about the Hitman games prior to this was its formula, which is this: you choose your weapons, you're dropped in an unnervingly large, living and breathing environment, and you have to figure out a way to kick ass. Three things. Absolution, while still possessing many great features, has none of them. You have no say in planning a mission. You are hand-held through a set path of events that have no bearing on each other, and you're told how to do it through a constant score tally and a series of challenges and achievements.

The mouse presses the green button for some cheese, and the red one for an electric shock.

But there are technical problems too, problems that weren't present in previous games. You lose your disguise when changing levels, which can mean that you're wearing different clothes leaving a door to when you entered it. And when you activate a checkpoint mid-level, after you fail and reload (shit happens), all the enemies that you've taken out respawn, and all the objects you may have strategically positioned magically disappear. A kick in the teeth, that.

And also the trademark disguise system is full of holes. It plays under the feature that all people wearing the same clothes can instantly spot you out, but only them. So basically, you could be a policeman, one of tens in the level - and they all know each other so incredibly well, that they can all tell that instantly that you're an impostor despite what you do, yet they will not bat an eyelid to a man in a chipmunk suit sprinting around the street.

I'm being overly critical here. Absolution has many great points. There are a few open-ended levels that are nods to older days, and they are truly brilliant - if you blank out their context. Some of the run-and-hide sequences are quite fun, but the linearity means that you end up having to do the exact same thing over and over if you fail, instead of trying a different approach. The graphics, animation, music and voice acting are all superb. It's like they made a game out of the poor Hitman movie, which was in turn based upon the game - and something was lost in reverse translation.

It's a hallmark of the Call of Duty era. Games where the player isn't expected to think for themselves, where the content and the explosions and the flashing lights have to make the entertainment. It's why games take longer to make yet are shorter to play, are more expensive to produce, and why generally they lack an individual flair.

It's not the fault of the developers. I know IO Interactive are perfectly capable of making an amazing game. They made all the Hitman games before this one. Hitman 2 was years ahead of its time. But the publishers and the shareholders will see that Balls of Duty: Cack Ops makes trillions of dollars, and will naturally force the developers, the guys sitting at the computers, to make a game more along that vein. And the developers might not want to. And that shows. There's a lack of heart to Absolution. The individual parts are well-crafted, but they do not slot together well. It's all the parts of a Land Rover, mercilessly hammered into the shape of a Ferrari.

A damn shame, really. And I only hope that the series can recover, by taking in the user feedback (that for the most part mirrors mine), and restoring itself back to former glory. I still have faith in the series yet.